Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: temperature measurement.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. Why is the measurement of temperature important in anaesthesia,
and what makes a temperature-measuring device suitable for clinical use?
The measurement of temperature is an important and required part of anaesthetic
monitoring, because the maintenance of normothermia matters greatly to patient
outcome, and the detection of disturbances of temperature in either direction is
essential to safe care.
Temperature monitoring allows the detection and management of the perioperative
hypothermia that so readily develops under anaesthesia,
with its consequences for coagulation, infection, drug metabolism,
recovery and cardiac morbidity, and it allows the detection of hyperthermia,
which may signal sepsis, a transfusion reaction, an overactive warming device,
or the rare but life-threatening malignant hyperthermia,
in which a rapidly rising temperature is a key sign demanding immediate recognition.
Temperature is therefore monitored in any but the briefest anaesthetic.
The qualities that make a temperature-measuring device suitable for clinical use
are several. It should be accurate over the clinically relevant range and reliable.
It should have a rapid response time, following changes in temperature quickly,
which is important for detecting rapid changes such as in malignant hyperthermia
and for measuring a true reading promptly.
It should be small and convenient, allowing placement at the appropriate site,
including continuous internal measurement. It should give a continuous reading that
can be displayed and alarmed, favouring electrical devices.
And it should be safe, robust and not hazardous to the patient.
These requirements largely favour the small, fast,
electrical devices for continuous clinical monitoring.
So temperature measurement is important to detect and manage perioperative
hypothermia and to recognise hyperthermia, including malignant hyperthermia,
and a suitable clinical device should be accurate over the clinical range,
have a rapid response, be small and convenient for continuous internal measurement,
give a displayable alarmed reading, and be safe — requirements favouring the small,
fast electrical devices.
How may temperature-measuring devices be classified?
Temperature-measuring devices may be classified according to the physical property
that changes with temperature and that the device senses,
and this classification organises an understanding of the range of thermometers,
from the simple to the electronic.
A broad division is into non-electrical and electrical devices.
The non-electrical devices rely on a physical change that is observed directly.
These include the devices based on the thermal expansion of a substance — the
liquid expansion thermometer, such as the mercury or alcohol-in-glass thermometer,
and the bimetallic strip, which uses the differential expansion of two metals;
and devices based on the change in pressure of a gas or vapour with temperature,
such as the Bourdon-gauge thermometer.
They also include chemical and liquid-crystal devices that change colour with
temperature. The electrical devices,
which dominate modern clinical monitoring because they are small, fast,
and give a continuous remote reading, convert temperature into an electrical signal.
These comprise the resistance thermometer,
which uses the change in the electrical resistance of a metal with temperature;
the thermistor, which uses the change in resistance of a semiconductor;
and the thermocouple, which uses the small voltage generated at the junction of two
dissimilar metals.
A further category is the infrared, or radiation, thermometer,
which detects the thermal radiation emitted by a surface,
allowing non-contact measurement. Each device has its principle, accuracy,
response time and appropriate application.
So temperature devices are classified by the property they sense:
non-electrical devices using thermal expansion (liquid-in-glass, bimetallic strip),
gas or vapour pressure, or colour change;
electrical devices converting temperature to a signal (resistance thermometer,
thermistor, thermocouple); and infrared devices detecting emitted radiation — the
electrical devices dominating continuous clinical monitoring.
Describe the liquid-expansion thermometer.
The liquid-expansion thermometer, the familiar mercury or alcohol-in-glass
thermometer, is the classic temperature-measuring device,
and although now largely replaced for clinical use,
it illustrates the principle of thermal expansion and provides a reference point
for understanding measurement.
The device consists of a glass bulb containing a liquid, connected to a fine,
narrow capillary tube within a glass stem marked with a calibrated scale.
The principle is the thermal expansion of the liquid: as the temperature rises,
the liquid in the bulb expands and rises up the fine capillary,
the height of the liquid column indicating the temperature against the scale;
the narrow bore of the capillary amplifies the small change in volume into a
readily visible movement.
Mercury was traditionally used because it expands uniformly,
does not wet the glass, and remains liquid over the relevant range,
while coloured alcohol or other liquids are used as safer alternatives.
The clinical mercury thermometer incorporated a constriction near the bulb that
allowed the mercury to rise but prevented it falling back,
so the maximum temperature reached was retained for reading.
The liquid-expansion thermometer is simple, cheap and reasonably accurate,
but it has significant disadvantages for clinical monitoring: it responds slowly,
taking minutes to equilibrate, so it cannot follow rapid changes;
it cannot easily give a continuous or remote reading; it is fragile;
and the mercury type poses a hazard of toxic mercury if broken,
which has led to its replacement.
So the liquid-expansion thermometer measures temperature by the thermal expansion
of a liquid rising up a fine capillary against a scale,
the narrow bore amplifying the change, with mercury or safer alcohol as the liquid;
simple and accurate but slow-responding, fragile,
not giving a continuous remote reading, and, for mercury,
hazardous — hence superseded for clinical monitoring.
Describe the bimetallic strip and the Bourdon-type thermometer.
The bimetallic strip and the gas or vapour pressure thermometer of the Bourdon type
are two further non-electrical devices, both mechanical,
that exploit thermal expansion in different ways,
and a brief account of them completes the non-electrical devices.
The bimetallic strip consists of two different metals,
with different coefficients of thermal expansion,
bonded firmly together along their length.
Because the two metals expand by different amounts as the temperature changes,
the strip bends or curves, the metal that expands more forming the outside of the
curve; the degree of bending indicates the temperature.
The strip is commonly wound into a coil or spiral to amplify the movement,
which is linked to a pointer over a scale.
The bimetallic strip is robust and simple,
used in dial thermometers and as a temperature-sensitive element in thermostats
and, as noted, in the temperature compensation of vaporisers,
but it is not well suited to precise or rapid clinical measurement.
The Bourdon-type thermometer adapts the Bourdon gauge principle to temperature:
a bulb containing a gas or a volatile liquid is connected to a Bourdon tube,
and as the temperature changes, the pressure of the gas or the vapour pressure of
the liquid changes — rising with temperature — and this changing pressure deflects
the Bourdon tube, moving a pointer over a temperature scale.
It allows the sensing bulb to be placed at a distance from the dial.
These mechanical devices are robust but less precise and slower than the electrical
devices.
So the bimetallic strip bends as its two bonded metals expand differently,
indicating temperature and used in dial thermometers,
thermostats and vaporiser compensation,
while the Bourdon-type thermometer senses the temperature-dependent pressure of a
gas or vapour in a bulb through a Bourdon tube — both robust mechanical devices,
but less precise and slower than the electrical thermometers.
Describe the resistance thermometer.
The resistance thermometer is the first of the electrical temperature-measuring
devices, and it provides accurate measurement by exploiting the change in the
electrical resistance of a metal with temperature,
so its principle and characteristics merit description.
The principle is that the electrical resistance of a metal increases as its
temperature rises, in a manner that is reproducible and, for a suitable metal,
nearly linear over the relevant range.
Platinum is the metal of choice, because its resistance changes with temperature in
a stable, reproducible and almost linear fashion over a wide range,
and it is chemically inert and stable;
the device is therefore often called a platinum resistance thermometer.
The thermometer consists of a fine platinum wire or film whose resistance is
measured, usually by incorporating it into a Wheatstone bridge circuit,
which senses the change in resistance accurately and converts it to a temperature
reading.
The resistance thermometer is highly accurate and stable, with good linearity,
which makes it a reference standard for temperature measurement and suitable for
precise applications.
Its response time is moderate, slower than the smallest devices because of the mass
of the platinum element, and it is somewhat larger and more expensive than the
thermistor, which limits its use as a small clinical probe;
a current must be passed through it to measure its resistance,
which can cause slight self-heating if excessive.
It is used where accuracy and stability are paramount.
So the resistance thermometer measures temperature from the increase in the
electrical resistance of a metal, platinum being chosen for its stable,
reproducible and nearly linear response,
the resistance sensed by a Wheatstone bridge; it is highly accurate,
stable and linear, a reference standard,
but its larger size and moderate response time make it less suited than the
thermistor as a small fast clinical probe.
Describe the thermistor and its advantages for clinical use.
The thermistor is the electrical temperature-measuring device most widely used for
clinical monitoring, and its properties,
which differ from the resistance thermometer, make it particularly suited to small,
fast clinical probes, so understanding it is important.
Like the resistance thermometer, the thermistor measures temperature from a change
in electrical resistance, but it uses a semiconductor material rather than a metal,
and its behaviour is different in two key respects.
First, the resistance of the semiconductor falls markedly as the temperature rises
— the opposite direction to a metal,
and a large change — giving the thermistor a high sensitivity,
so that small temperature changes produce large,
easily measured changes in resistance.
Second, the relationship between resistance and temperature is markedly non-linear,
an exponential-type curve, so the device requires calibration and linearisation by
its associated electronics to give a correct reading over the range.
The great practical advantages of the thermistor for clinical use are that the
semiconductor bead can be made extremely small,
allowing a tiny probe with a very low thermal mass;
this gives a very rapid response time, following temperature changes quickly,
and allows the probe to be placed at sites such as the oesophagus, nasopharynx,
and on catheters, including the pulmonary artery catheter for thermodilution.
Its high sensitivity gives good resolution.
Its disadvantages are the non-linearity requiring calibration,
some drift and ageing over time requiring the bead to be matched and calibrated,
and a more limited range than the resistance thermometer.
So the thermistor measures temperature from the large,
non-linear fall in the resistance of a semiconductor bead as temperature rises,
giving high sensitivity; its very small size and low thermal mass give a rapid
response suited to small clinical probes at internal sites,
at the cost of non-linearity requiring calibration and some drift — making it the
usual clinical thermometer.
Describe the thermocouple and the Seebeck effect.
The thermocouple is the third principal electrical temperature-measuring device,
working on a quite different principle from the resistance-based devices — the
generation of a voltage at the junction of dissimilar metals — and its
characteristics suit it to small, fast probes, so its principle merits explanation.
The thermocouple exploits the Seebeck effect:
when two wires of different metals are joined to form a junction,
a small voltage is generated across the junction that depends on its temperature;
if a circuit is made of two such junctions of the two metals,
and the junctions are at different temperatures,
a voltage and a current flow proportional to the temperature difference between the
junctions.
In the thermometer, one junction, the measuring junction,
is placed at the site whose temperature is to be measured, and the other,
the reference junction, is kept at a known reference temperature;
the voltage generated indicates the temperature difference, and hence,
knowing the reference temperature, the measured temperature.
In practice the reference is provided electronically rather than by a physical
ice-point. The metals are chosen for a suitable and reproducible
voltage-temperature relationship, copper and constantan being a common pair.
The thermocouple's advantages are that the measuring junction can be made extremely
small, giving a very small, robust probe with a rapid response and the ability to
measure at a point, useful for small probes and needle thermocouples;
it is reasonably accurate.
Its relationship is somewhat non-linear and the voltage small,
requiring amplification and a known reference.
So the thermocouple measures temperature by the Seebeck effect,
the voltage generated at the junction of two dissimilar metals depending on
temperature, with a measuring and a reference junction;
its junction can be made very small, giving a small, robust, fast probe,
at the cost of a small, somewhat non-linear voltage requiring amplification and a
reference temperature.
Describe the infrared thermometer.
The infrared, or radiation, thermometer measures temperature without contact by
detecting the thermal radiation emitted by a surface,
and it has particular clinical applications, notably the tympanic thermometer,
so its principle and uses warrant description.
The principle rests on the fact that all objects emit electromagnetic radiation,
predominantly in the infrared, by virtue of their temperature,
the amount and spectrum of this radiation depending on the temperature of the
surface — a hotter surface emitting more radiation.
The infrared thermometer contains a sensor that detects the infrared radiation
entering it from the target surface and, from the intensity of that radiation,
calculates the surface temperature, allowing a rapid, non-contact measurement.
The principal clinical application is the tympanic membrane thermometer,
which is directed into the ear canal to detect the infrared radiation from the
tympanic membrane; the tympanic membrane is valued as a site because it shares its
blood supply with the hypothalamus and so reflects core temperature,
and the measurement is quick and non-invasive.
Temporal artery thermometers similarly detect infrared emission from the skin over
the temporal artery. The advantages are speed, convenience and non-contact,
useful for rapid screening and where contact measurement is difficult.
The limitations are that the accuracy depends on correct technique — proper aiming
at the tympanic membrane rather than the ear canal wall — and on the emissivity of
the surface, so that the common aural infrared thermometers, though convenient,
are less reliable and reproducible than contact core measurement,
and may not reflect rapid core changes.
So the infrared thermometer measures temperature without contact by detecting the
thermal radiation emitted by a surface, its intensity indicating the temperature;
used clinically chiefly as the tympanic thermometer reflecting core temperature and
the temporal artery thermometer, it is quick and convenient but its accuracy
depends on technique and emissivity,
being less reliable than contact core measurement.
What are liquid-crystal and chemical temperature indicators?
Liquid-crystal and chemical temperature indicators are simple,
non-electrical devices that indicate temperature by a colour change,
and although of limited accuracy, they have a place for simple,
non-invasive screening, so a brief account is warranted.
Liquid-crystal thermometers use thermochromic liquid crystals — substances whose
molecular arrangement, and hence the wavelength of light they reflect,
changes with temperature, so that they change colour as the temperature varies.
Incorporated into a strip applied to the skin, typically the forehead,
the liquid crystals display the temperature by the colour or the position of a
colour change along a calibrated strip.
They are simple, cheap, non-invasive, single-use and convenient,
but they measure skin temperature, which is peripheral and lower than and may not
reflect core temperature, particularly when peripheral perfusion is altered,
so they are of limited accuracy for core temperature and are used for trends or
rough screening rather than precise measurement.
Chemical thermometers, or temperature-indicating labels,
use a chemical that melts or changes colour at a specific temperature,
indicating whether a threshold has been reached;
some single-use clinical thermometers use a matrix of chemical dots that change
colour at successive temperatures, the highest changed dot indicating the
temperature, providing a disposable,
infection-control-friendly device of moderate accuracy.
These devices trade accuracy for simplicity, safety and convenience.
So liquid-crystal thermometers indicate temperature by the colour change of
thermochromic crystals, usually applied to the skin,
and chemical thermometers by the colour change or melting of a chemical at set
temperatures; simple, cheap, non-invasive and disposable,
but of limited accuracy and, for the skin devices,
reflecting peripheral rather than core temperature — suited to screening and trends
rather than precise measurement.
Compare the devices in terms of accuracy, response time and suitability.
It is helpful to compare the temperature-measuring devices directly in terms of the
qualities that matter clinically — accuracy, response time,
and suitability for the clinical task — because this guides the rational choice of
device.
For accuracy and stability, the platinum resistance thermometer is the most
accurate and stable, serving as a reference standard,
followed by well-calibrated thermistors and thermocouples,
which are accurate enough for clinical use;
the liquid-expansion thermometer is reasonably accurate but slow;
the infrared and liquid-crystal devices are the least reliable for core temperature.
For response time, which matters for following rapid changes and for prompt
measurement, the smallest, lowest-thermal-mass devices respond fastest:
the thermistor and thermocouple, with their tiny sensing elements,
respond very rapidly, making them suited to continuous internal monitoring and to
detecting rapid changes such as in malignant hyperthermia;
the resistance thermometer is somewhat slower owing to its larger element;
and the liquid-expansion thermometer is slow, taking minutes.
For suitability, the thermistor is the usual choice for continuous clinical
monitoring, being small, fast, sensitive and able to be placed on probes at
internal sites; the thermocouple similarly suits small probes;
the resistance thermometer suits applications needing the highest accuracy;
the infrared tympanic thermometer suits quick non-invasive screening;
and the liquid-crystal and chemical devices suit simple disposable screening.
The choice thus balances the accuracy and response needed against the site and
convenience.
So the platinum resistance thermometer is the most accurate,
the thermistor and thermocouple fastest and most suited to small continuous
internal probes, the liquid-expansion thermometer accurate but slow,
and the infrared and colour-change devices convenient but least reliable — the
thermistor being the usual clinical choice, balancing accuracy,
rapid response and convenient placement.
Briefly, what are the sites of temperature measurement and their relation to the
devices?
The site at which temperature is measured determines how faithfully it reflects the
core temperature, and the choice of site is linked to the device used,
so a brief account relates the two, drawing on the principles of thermoregulation.
Core temperature, the temperature of the vital organs,
is best represented by the blood in the great vessels and heart,
and the sites that reflect it well are used for accurate clinical monitoring.
The pulmonary artery, measured by a thermistor on a pulmonary artery catheter,
is the gold standard. The distal oesophagus,
measured by a thermistor or thermocouple probe,
gives an excellent and practical estimate under general anaesthesia and is widely
used.
The nasopharynx, similarly probed, is reliable if well placed.
The tympanic membrane reflects core temperature,
measured by a contact thermistor probe or, less reliably,
by the infrared aural thermometer.
The bladder, by a thermistor on a urinary catheter,
tracks core temperature when urine flow is adequate.
The rectum reflects core temperature but lags and may be affected by faeces.
Skin and axillary sites are peripheral, reading lower and varying with perfusion,
suited only to trends or to the liquid-crystal devices.
Thus the small, fast electrical probes — thermistors and thermocouples — are used
at the internal core sites for accurate continuous monitoring,
while the infrared and skin devices are used at the more accessible but less
reliable sites.
So temperature is measured at core sites — the pulmonary artery, distal oesophagus,
nasopharynx, tympanic membrane and bladder — using small thermistor or thermocouple
probes for accurate continuous monitoring, while the rectum lags,
and skin and axillary sites are peripheral;
the choice of site and device together determine how well the reading reflects core
temperature.
What are the sources of error in temperature measurement?
Temperature measurement, like any measurement, is subject to errors,
and recognising them is important to avoid being misled,
particularly as decisions about warming and the detection of serious conditions
depend on accurate readings.
The most fundamental source of error is the site of measurement and its relation to
core temperature: a peripheral site such as the skin or axilla reads lower than the
core and varies with perfusion, so it may seriously underestimate core temperature,
and even good sites give errors if the probe is misplaced — an oesophageal probe
positioned too high, in the upper oesophagus,
may be cooled by inspired gases and read falsely low,
and a nasopharyngeal or tympanic probe not correctly placed reads inaccurately.
Calibration errors and drift affect the devices, particularly thermistors,
which require calibration and may drift with ageing, and thermocouples,
which need an accurate reference; periodic calibration is necessary.
Response-time errors arise if a slow device, or one not allowed to equilibrate,
is read before it has reached the true temperature,
underestimating a rising temperature — important when a rapid rise,
as in malignant hyperthermia, must be detected promptly, favouring fast devices.
The infrared tympanic thermometer is prone to technique-dependent errors from poor
aiming and from earwax. Self-heating of resistance devices by the measuring
current, electrical interference, and probe damage are further sources.
Disconnection or probe failure gives absent or erroneous readings.
So temperature-measurement errors arise chiefly from the site and probe placement,
peripheral sites underestimating core and misplaced probes reading falsely;
from calibration drift, especially of thermistors;
from slow response or inadequate equilibration delaying the detection of rapid
changes; and from technique-dependent infrared errors, self-heating,
interference and probe failure — recognised by correct site and device choice,
calibration, and attention to placement.
How does accurate temperature measurement contribute to the recognition of
malignant hyperthermia?
Accurate and continuous temperature measurement plays an important part in the
recognition of malignant hyperthermia,
a rare but life-threatening anaesthetic emergency,
and considering this illustrates the clinical value of the qualities of a good
temperature monitor.
Malignant hyperthermia is a pharmacogenetic disorder in which exposure to
triggering anaesthetic agents — the volatile agents and suxamethonium — provokes,
in susceptible individuals, an uncontrolled hypermetabolic reaction in skeletal
muscle, with a massive increase in metabolism, carbon dioxide production,
oxygen consumption and heat generation,
leading to a rapidly rising body temperature among other features.
While a rising temperature is a characteristic and serious sign,
it is important to note that it is often a relatively late sign,
the earlier signs being an unexplained rise in end-tidal carbon dioxide,
tachycardia and muscle rigidity; nonetheless,
the detection of a rapid rise in temperature is an important part of recognising
and confirming the condition and of monitoring its progress and treatment.
For this, the qualities of the temperature monitor matter:
a continuous reading from a core site,
using a fast-responding device such as a thermistor,
is needed to detect a rapid rise promptly,
whereas an intermittent or slow measurement might miss or delay the recognition of
a steeply climbing temperature.
Continuous core temperature monitoring is therefore part of the safe conduct of
anaesthesia, allowing the early detection of the temperature rise of malignant
hyperthermia and the monitoring of the aggressive cooling that forms part of its
treatment.
So accurate, continuous core temperature measurement with a fast-responding device
contributes to recognising malignant hyperthermia by detecting its rapid
temperature rise — though often a later sign than the rise in end-tidal carbon
dioxide — and to monitoring the cooling of its treatment,
illustrating the value of a fast, continuous, core-site monitor.
Finally, draw together the principles of temperature measurement as they bear on
practice.
Drawing the station together, the measurement of temperature is an essential part
of anaesthetic monitoring, underpinning the maintenance of normothermia and the
detection of dangerous disturbances of temperature,
and the rational choice and use of temperature-measuring devices rests on
understanding their principles, qualities and errors.
Temperature is monitored to detect and manage perioperative hypothermia,
with its many harms, and to recognise hyperthermia,
including the rapidly rising temperature of malignant hyperthermia.
The devices are classified by the property they sense:
the non-electrical devices using thermal expansion — the liquid-expansion
thermometer and bimetallic strip — and gas or vapour pressure,
and the colour-changing liquid-crystal and chemical indicators;
and the electrical devices that dominate continuous clinical monitoring — the
accurate, stable, linear platinum resistance thermometer; the small, fast,
sensitive but non-linear thermistor, the usual clinical choice; and the small,
fast thermocouple using the Seebeck effect — together with the non-contact infrared
thermometer of the tympanic and temporal sites.
The choice balances accuracy, response time and suitability:
the thermistor at core sites such as the oesophagus, nasopharynx,
pulmonary artery and bladder is the usual means of accurate, rapid,
continuous monitoring, while peripheral sites and infrared and colour devices are
less reliable.
Errors arise chiefly from the site and probe placement, calibration drift,
slow response and technique, and accurate, continuous,
fast core measurement is particularly important for detecting the rapid changes of
malignant hyperthermia.
So temperature measurement unites the physics of thermal expansion,
electrical resistance, thermoelectricity and radiation with the clinical
requirements of accuracy, rapid response and convenient core-site placement,
and its understanding — with attention to site,
device and error — is fundamental to the monitoring of temperature that safeguards
the anaesthetised patient.
Describe zero-heat-flux and other non-invasive methods of estimating core
temperature.
Non-invasive methods of estimating core temperature without an internal probe have
been developed, of which the zero-heat-flux method is the most established,
and these are of growing importance because they allow core temperature to be
monitored in patients in whom an internal probe is impractical,
such as the awake or regional-anaesthesia patient.
The difficulty with simply measuring skin temperature is that the skin is cooler
than the core because heat flows from the warm core through the insulating tissues
to the cooler skin surface; the skin therefore underestimates core temperature.
The zero-heat-flux method overcomes this by abolishing that heat flow locally.
A sensor applied to the skin, typically over the forehead,
incorporates a heating element and temperature sensors above and below an
insulating layer; the heater warms the skin beneath the sensor until there is no
temperature difference across the insulating layer, that is,
no heat flowing through it — zero heat flux.
When no heat is flowing outward, the skin beneath the sensor has equilibrated with
the underlying tissue, so the temperature measured at the surface equals the
temperature a little below the skin, approximating the core temperature.
This gives a continuous, non-invasive estimate of core temperature that correlates
reasonably with measured core sites. Related methods estimate core temperature from
a combination of skin and ambient measurements by a heat-balance model.
These methods are valued for non-invasive continuous core monitoring,
particularly where internal probes are unsuitable,
though their accuracy may be less than direct core measurement in rapidly changing
conditions.
So the zero-heat-flux method estimates core temperature non-invasively by a
forehead sensor that heats the skin until no heat flows across an insulating layer,
so the surface temperature equilibrates with and reflects the underlying core
temperature, giving a continuous non-invasive estimate valuable where internal
probes are impractical, such as in awake or regional anaesthesia.
How are temperature-measuring devices calibrated, and against what reference points?
Like any measuring instrument, temperature-measuring devices require calibration
against known reference temperatures to ensure their accuracy,
and the use of reproducible fixed points underlies this calibration,
so an account of it completes the understanding of reliable temperature measurement.
Calibration involves checking and adjusting a thermometer against one or more
known, accurately reproducible temperatures — fixed points — so that its readings
are correct across the range.
The classical fixed points are the highly reproducible temperatures of certain
physical states of pure substances. The ice point, the melting point of pure ice,
provides a reproducible reference at zero degrees Celsius.
The steam point, the boiling point of water at standard atmospheric pressure,
provides a reference at one hundred degrees, though,
as the boiling point depends on pressure,
the triple point of water — the unique temperature and pressure at which ice,
water and vapour coexist, just above zero degrees — is preferred as a more
precisely reproducible reference, and historically defined the kelvin.
Other fixed points, the melting and freezing points of metals,
define the international temperature scale at higher temperatures.
A clinical thermometer is calibrated against such references,
or against a more accurate reference thermometer,
such as a platinum resistance thermometer,
that is itself traceable through a chain of calibration to the national and
international standards, ensuring traceability.
Thermistors in particular require calibration because of their non-linearity and
drift, and devices should be checked periodically.
So temperature devices are calibrated against accurately reproducible fixed points
— the ice point, the steam or triple point of water,
and metal melting points defining the temperature scale — or against a traceable
reference thermometer such as a platinum resistance thermometer,
ensuring accuracy and traceability,
with thermistors particularly needing calibration for their non-linearity and drift.
What is the value of measuring skin temperature and the core-to-peripheral
temperature gradient?
While skin temperature is a poor measure of core temperature,
the measurement of peripheral skin temperature and, in particular,
the gradient between the core and the periphery has a distinct and useful clinical
value as an indicator of peripheral perfusion and of the adequacy of the
circulation, so its place is worth explaining.
The skin and peripheral tissues are perfused and warmed by the circulation,
and when the peripheral circulation is good,
the periphery is warm and its temperature approaches the core;
when the peripheral circulation is poor — as in hypovolaemia, low cardiac output,
or vasoconstriction from cold or shock — the periphery becomes cool,
and the difference between the core and the peripheral, such as toe,
temperature widens.
The core-to-peripheral, or core-to-toe,
temperature gradient is therefore used as an indicator of the state of the
peripheral circulation and of tissue perfusion: a small gradient,
with a warm periphery, suggests good perfusion and vasodilatation,
while a large gradient, with a cool periphery,
suggests poor perfusion and vasoconstriction.
The narrowing of a previously wide gradient can indicate improving perfusion in
response to resuscitation, and a widening gradient a deterioration.
This is used particularly in the assessment of the critically ill and in monitoring
the response to fluid resuscitation and inotropes.
It requires measuring both a core temperature and a peripheral skin temperature,
usually of the great toe, simultaneously.
So measuring skin temperature and the core-to-peripheral temperature gradient gives
a useful indicator of peripheral perfusion and circulatory adequacy — a small
gradient indicating good perfusion and a large gradient poor perfusion and
vasoconstriction — used in assessing the critically ill and the response to
resuscitation, requiring simultaneous core and peripheral measurement.
How is a thermistor used in the measurement of cardiac output by thermodilution?
The thermistor, beyond simply monitoring body temperature,
has an important application in the measurement of cardiac output by the
thermodilution method, and describing this illustrates how the rapid response of
the thermistor is exploited in a measurement technique.
The thermodilution method measures cardiac output by an application of the
indicator-dilution principle, using a change in temperature as the indicator.
A known volume of cold, or room-temperature,
fluid is injected as a bolus into the right atrium through a pulmonary artery
catheter; this cooler fluid mixes with and transiently cools the blood,
and the cooled blood is carried by the cardiac output through the right heart into
the pulmonary artery.
A thermistor mounted near the tip of the pulmonary artery catheter,
lying in the pulmonary artery downstream,
detects the resulting transient fall and recovery of the blood temperature as the
cooled blood passes, producing a temperature-time curve.
The area under this curve depends inversely on the cardiac output:
if the cardiac output is high, the cold bolus is carried past quickly and diluted
by a large flow, giving a small, brief temperature change and a small area;
if the cardiac output is low, the change is larger and more prolonged.
The cardiac output is calculated from the temperature-time curve by a modification
of the Stewart-Hamilton equation. The thermistor's rapid response is essential to
capturing the transient temperature change faithfully.
So in thermodilution, a cold bolus injected into the right atrium transiently cools
the blood, and a fast-responding thermistor on the pulmonary artery catheter
detects the temperature-time curve downstream,
from whose area the cardiac output is calculated inversely — an application
exploiting the thermistor's rapid response to a transient temperature change.
When should temperature be monitored during anaesthesia, and what is recommended?
The recommendations for temperature monitoring during anaesthesia reflect the
importance of maintaining normothermia and detecting temperature disturbance,
and an awareness of when and how temperature should be monitored is part of the
practical application of these principles.
Temperature monitoring is recommended whenever the duration or nature of the
anaesthetic makes a clinically significant change in temperature likely,
which in practice is for any anaesthetic beyond the briefest;
guidelines recommend that temperature be measured and recorded for procedures of
more than a short duration, commonly cited as anaesthetics lasting more than about
half an hour, and that it should be measured in any patient at particular risk of,
or in whom a change in, temperature is anticipated.
The purpose is twofold: to detect and guide the management of hypothermia,
allowing active warming to be instituted and titrated to maintain normothermia,
and to detect hyperthermia, including the temperature rise of malignant
hyperthermia.
The recommendations also extend to the perioperative period more broadly:
measuring the patient's temperature before induction,
since pre-existing hypothermia and pre-warming influence the course,
monitoring throughout the procedure at an appropriate core site,
and continuing to monitor in recovery.
A core site and a continuous, accurate device,
usually a thermistor probe at the oesophagus or nasopharynx under general
anaesthesia, are preferred. Active warming and the avoidance of heat loss accompany
the monitoring.
So temperature should be monitored for all but the briefest anaesthetics,
commonly those over about half an hour and in at-risk patients,
to detect and manage hypothermia and to detect hyperthermia including malignant
hyperthermia, measured before induction,
continuously at a core site during the procedure, and into recovery,
using a continuous accurate device such as a thermistor probe,
accompanied by active warming.
Thank you. A comprehensive and accomplished account,
and a fitting close to this batch of physics stations. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Temperature is monitored to detect/manage perioperative hypothermia
(coagulopathy, infection, delayed recovery,
cardiac risk) and to recognise hyperthermia, including malignant hyperthermia;
a good clinical device is accurate over the clinical range, fast-responding,
small for core-site placement, continuous/alarmed,
and safe - favouring small electrical devices.
Second, Non-electrical devices use thermal expansion (liquid-in-glass - simple but
slow and fragile; the bimetallic strip - used in dials,
thermostats and vaporiser compensation), gas/vapour pressure (Bourdon type),
or colour change (liquid-crystal skin strips and chemical-dot thermometers -
convenient but peripheral/limited accuracy).
Third, Electrical devices: the platinum RESISTANCE thermometer (resistance rises
with temperature, stable, accurate,
nearly linear - a reference standard but larger/slower);
the THERMISTOR (semiconductor resistance falls steeply and non-linearly with
temperature - very small, fast, sensitive: the usual clinical probe,
needs calibration); the THERMOCOUPLE (Seebeck effect - voltage at a junction of
dissimilar metals, with a measuring and reference junction - small, fast).
Fourth, The infrared (radiation) thermometer measures without contact by detecting
emitted infrared - used as the tympanic thermometer (shares blood supply with the
hypothalamus, reflecting core) and temporal artery thermometer - quick but
technique- and emissivity-dependent, less reliable than contact core measurement.
Fifth, Core sites (pulmonary artery, distal oesophagus, nasopharynx,
tympanic membrane, bladder) measured with fast thermistor/thermocouple probes give
accurate continuous monitoring (rectum lags; skin/axilla are peripheral);
errors arise from site/probe placement, calibration drift,
slow response and technique - and fast,
continuous core measurement is important for detecting the rapid temperature rise
of malignant hyperthermia (though often a LATER sign than rising end-tidal carbon
dioxide).
Thank you. That concludes the station.